{:popover: href="javascript:void(0)" data-toggle="popover" data-html="true" data-placement="bottom"}

I work on [Algorithmic Number Theory](){: popover
data-original-title="Algorithmic Number Theory" data-content="The
study of algorithms for performing number theoretic computations
(e.g. integer factorization), and of their applications. The <a
href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_Number_Theory_Symposium'>ANTS
conference series</a> is the major conference in the domain"} and
[Computer Algebra](){: popover data-original-title="Computer Algebra"
data-content="The study of algorithms for the <em>symbolic
manipulation</em> of mathematical expressions and other mathematical
objects.  The <a href='http://www.issac-conference.org/'>ISSAC
conference series</a> is the major conference in the domain."}. I am
interested in the invention and development of algorithms for
[Finite Fields](){: popover data-original-title="Finite Field"
data-content="One of the many generalization of <em>numbers</em>. <a
href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_Field'>Wikipedia page</a>."}
and [Elliptic Curves](){: popover data-original-title="Elliptic Curve"
data-content="<em>Plane projective curves of genus 1</em> (note that
these are not ellipses), probably the simplest kind of <em>algebraic
curve</em>. <a
href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve'>Wikipedia
page</a>."}, in particular when they have applications to
[Cryptology](){: popover data-original-title="Cryptology"
data-content="The study of algorithms for <em>secure</em>
communication in presence of <em>adversaries</em>. <a
href='http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography'>Wikipedia
page</a>".}. Read my [**blog**](/blog) to know more about it.
