---
layout: post
tags: [web, teaching]
title: 8 weeks and 60 students with Cloud9
---

I would like to finish my series on teaching web programming with a
report on how the online IDE [Cloud9](http://c9.io) helped improve my
students productivity.

As you might know if you
[read French newspapers](http://www.letudiant.fr/educpros/enquetes/crise-a-l-universite-versailles-saint-quentin-uvsq-la-communaute-dans-l-incertitude.html),
UVSQ is a university on a low budget. The department has only one
computer room, and it is best avoided. Students bring their own
laptops to tutorials, or they can borrow one from the library.

When I gave my course the first year, several precious tutoring hours
were lost installing, configuring and debugging WAMPs, LAMPs and
virtual machines. The switch to [Node.js](http://nodejs.org) eased
things up: installation was generally smooth, apart for some version
problems on Ubuntu machines and missing SQLite interfaces for
Windows. Both years, I had to teach the students, especially those not
on Linux, how to launch and use a terminal.

Having decided to go back to PHP, I absolutely wanted to avoid the
painful installation of Apache and stacks. The cloud IDE Cloud9 looked
like a promising alternative, lifting the burden of handling dozens of
different configurations.

Cloud9 is a commercial product, offering free unlimited workspaces for
public development, plus one private workspace.  It has some
integration with GitHub, BitBucket and Heroku, and some limited
history and collaboration features are also available for free
accounts.  It can natively execute and debug Node.js instances, or run
PHP applications via Apache (other runtimes are also supported). It
includes a MySQL and a MongoDB server for development.

### The good

Thanks to Cloud9, the only problems left to solve on the first
tutorial were laptops not connecting to the network, and students
having confirmation emails from Cloud9 delayed or blocked by their
provider.

Once they were connected to the Cloud9 dashboard, the students could
get started coding immediately by cloning the
[project skeleton](https://github.com/defeo/aws-project) I had hosted
for them on GitHub. From then on they could work on their project (no
knowledge of git required), while I could update their configuration
files by asking them to pull. Some students eventually managed to mess
with their local git clone, but fixing it was a minor annoyance
overall.

Previewing static html files and running apps is as easy as a button
click: all students quickly caught the workflow, although some of them
were slow to grasp the difference between viewing static files and
running apps.

Because all projects are public, I could connect to the students'
workspaces at any time and observe their work live. This was useful in
the classroom, but even more important when addressing help requests
out of the class. The embedded chat room was also very useful when
helping students from home. Beyond the IDE front-end, each workspace
also offers a publicly accessible webdav directory. This let me easily
crawl and download all the students' work for local examination and
grading. I found this very convenient for the first part of the
course, where only client code was involved. At least in one case, my
local copy also served as a back-up save for a student who had
*accidentally* erased all her work.

However, visitors to workspaces do not have the rights to run
processes, hence they cannot run server code. When the students
started writing server code and using SQL, reproducing their
environment locally turned out to be too painful. Thus, I had to
resort to asking them for write permissions on their workspaces, which
also turned out to be a very convenient way to help them fixing Cloud9
glitches from a distance. In retrospect, I should have asked write
permissions from the beginning.

Finally, some comments on cheating. Yes, any student could see any
other student's work, if he could guess his colleague's login and
workspace name. This is in my opinion very good, and most students
used it constructively: taking example from their comrades' code,
using the chat to help each other, and even collaborating on
code. Obviously some students didn't refrain from using it to cheat,
and some went even as far as creating Cloud9 accounts with logins
similar to mine, so to not awake suspicions in their comrades. In
reaction, some of the good students created accounts with unguessable
usernames, or used the one free private project.

However it wasn't too hard to unmask the cheaters. My own
[plagiarism detection scripts](https://github.com/defeo/pylagiarist)
helped me narrow down the hunt, Cloud9 history tool did the rest: by
rewinding history, I could easily know when the students had been
working, when the copy-paste had happened, and what variables had been
renamed. Not only I had a very easy time detecting cheating, but I
even had irrefutable proofs of it.


### The bad

Cloud9 wasn't all joys and wonders. For one, it requires a good
network connection to function properly. Wifi connections, such as
eduroam, are likely to give a horrible experience. As obvious as this
may sound, some students kept forgetting or refusing to bring ethernet
cables: I had to always bring a stock with me.

Even on a wired connection, though, most students experienced serious
problems. The IDE would often lock one file or freeze completely, the
only solution being reloading. Before I prompted the students to
enable auto-saving, network errors would occasionally destroy one hour
worth of work. After they enabled auto-saving, some students
experienced severe slow-downs of the interface, and even then some
work was occasionally lost. Sometimes, after recovering from a freeze,
some files would be empty; a peak at the history would usually yield
all the contents back, but restoring previous versions is horribly
clumsy in the free version of Cloud9.

About a dozen of workspaces got locked at some point, with the
interface simply not able to read the filesystem. This required the
intervention of Cloud9 staff, often holding the student from working
for the rest of the day. In March, we were also unlucky enough to
experience a major platform problem affecting POST requests right
before a submission deadline.

Overall the use of Cloud9 turned out to be very frustrating for some
students. I wonder if the time gained by not having to install
anything locally wasn't compensated by the time lost fighting Cloud9
glitches. Thankfully, Cloud9 staff was very kind and responsive, and
usually solved all problems in one day's time.

To my surprise, more than 50% of the students thought very well of
Cloud9, grading it 4/5 or 5/5. In the end, I think the experiment
turned out well, and, whatever platform I am going to use next year,
there is no going back to the dear old local install. Beyond being
stable and not loosing data, my ideal platform would:

- Use Cloud9 IDE as front-end, or similar.
- Let me manage my group of students, view their projects, and
  automatically grant me write privileges on their repositories.
- Keep history robustly and often (e.g., using auto-save and Git).
- Do not allow the students to create multiple logins, and force them
  to be connected in order to use the platform.
- Simplify some workflows (e.g., using the MySQL database).
- Redirect PHP logs to the IDE console.

Maybe this can be achieved by installing the open source version of
Cloud9 on a university server with a customized back-end. I will
likely be experimenting with this before next year's course.


### Appendix

For reference, I report here some non-trivial configuration details
and bug fixes that I had to apply during the course.

- Due to bugs in Cloud9, or to bugs in the students code, the
  interface may freeze repeatedly. While it is not guaranteed to work, adding
  `?reset=1` to the workspace URL may help fixing problems. It simply
  returns the workspace to its initial state: no files open, no
  previews, no applications running. Here's one funny case where this
  was useful: a student had written an infinite loop in JavaScript,
  and opened its web page in the "Preview" tab. The preview would
  freeze the whole interface and crash the browser tab. But at each
  reload Cloud9 would open again the "Preview" tab... and crash again!

- If a `php.ini` file is placed in a Cloud9 workspace, its settings
  supersede the global ones. This has various uses: activate sessions,
  printing errors, etc. One important use for Silex: the PHP package
  manager [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) wants the setting
  `date.timezone` to be set.

- Integration with PHPMyAdmin is sure in the plans for Cloud9, but not
  ready yet. The simplest solution for me was to ship a lightweight
  open source MySQL manager, [SqlBuddy](http://sqlbuddy.com/),
  together with the project skeleton.

- One of the most annoying bugs, happening almost systematically,
  prevents the MySQL server from starting after a workspace
  freeze. This is a known bug with a fix documented
  [here](http://support.cloud9ide.com/entries/23091380-Recover-MySQL-permissions),
  but, had I known it before, it would not have hold so many students
  for the entire tutorial following spring break (during which many
  workspaces froze).

- Finally, one of the most random problems was caused by GitHub. The
  students working with Silex had to install it in Cloud9, together
  with its dependencies. I had given a `composer.json` file, so that
  they just had to run Composer in the Cloud9 terminal in order to
  download and install everything. Composer connects to GitHub's API,
  and GitHub limits anonymous requests to 60 per hour per IP. Since
  every user in Cloud9 has the same IP, chances are that some student
  may get rate limited. Fortunately Composer will fail with a
  meaningful error message, and will ask for a GitHub login in order
  to solve the problem. Unfortunately, the average student will not
  have a GitHub account, and will not understand what the message is
  asking for, so if this happens outside the class, expect an email. I
  was lucky: this happened only once. Another fix is described
  [here](http://fortrabbit.com/docs/how-to/misc/github-api-limits).
